
A taxonomy for activities: Dimensions in which to consider activities (Template)



Activity name

Describe the activity briefly



Objective

Supply of a need

How well does it supply a need?

Physiological

Safety

Love and belonging

Esteem

Self-actualization/Transcendence

Chakra

Awareness of which to balance

How well does it help you know which chakra to balance? (or in "western" terms: how well does it help you know which emotion you should be feeling in order to be more efficient in your life?)

Degree of Balance

How well does it balance a chakra?

[List all chakras here]



Definition of objectives

How well defined are the objectives? E.g. playing in a sandbox has no objective but playing a baseball game has the objective of winning the game



Intuitiveness

How intuitive is it to determine elements related to the activity? E.g. it might be very intuitive to know that eating supplies a physiological need but less intuitive to know how to achieve an objective in a game. It also depends on how perceptive the participant is

Objective

Effects/Mechanics

How intuitively can mechanics and consequences of the activity be figured out? E.g. if a participant does X, Y happens



Interactivity

How much do the participant's acts affect the next step of the activity? E.g. Playing a game is more interactive than watching a movie.

With the activity 

How much does a participant interact with the activity?

With others

How much does a participant interact with other participants during the activity?

Effect/Mechanics

How deeply does a participant interact with the mechanics of the activity?



Feedback

How effectively does the activity communicate consequences of it? E.g. eating gives good feedback that hunger is being depleted, especially if done slowly



Time quantum

Length

What is the length of a step in the activity relative to another measure of time? E.g. A step is an action in an activity. An activity is a set of steps that could happen one after the other and/or in parallel, just like walking {author's note: that's quite loose of a definition}. "Another measure of time" could be the “common time” experienced by the being, measured in second and other units. So, compared to common time,  a turn in a card game can take several seconds, and an attempt to bat a ball will take less than a second. Compared to the length of the full activity, a single attempt to bat will be much less of the whole baseball game than a turn in a card game that lasts just a few turns

Dependency

How much does the length of a step depend on a certain variable? E.g. Turns are the steps in a card game and the length of turns depend on how long the player takes to play. Playing notes are the steps in a rhythm game and the time between one step and the other does not depend on the user



Parallelism

How much can steps be done in parallel to each other? E.g. playing the flute you can only play a single note at a time, but playing the guitar you can play more than one string at a time.



Spatial needs

How much space does an activity require? E.g. normal chess might be confined to 2 participants but giant chess may more easily accommodate more participants



Joinability of steps

How easy is it to group/ungroup steps to analyze them separately or jointly? E.g. a football team might discuss strategies (combinations of steps) broadly/a batting swing can be analyzed very minutely to ensure all parts of the body are in the right place



Discovery

Amount

How much can users discover about the activity?

Ease of discoverability

How easily can users discover aspects of the activity?



Repeatability

How much are steps repeated?



Response

Insistence

How much does the activity attempt to elicit a response from the participant?

Sense

Which sense does the response come from?

Intensity

How intense is the response?

Pleasantness

How pleasant is the response in the participant’s experience?

Intentionality

How intentionally did the participant have that response?



Perspective

How does the place (real or metaphorical) from which the participant experiences the activity affect the response it has on the participant? E.g. experiencing war from the sight, ears, and touch of a soldier is different (evokes a different response) from that of a general that is away from the heat of battle.



Challenge

Alignment

How much do the participant's abilities match the requirements imposed by the activity?

Explicitness

How explicitly is the challenge conveyed?

User’s Perception

How is the challenge perceived? E.g. easy/hard, engaging/boring, motivating/unmotivating, as a path to growth/staleness



Increase of Participant’s Perceptiveness

How much can the activity help increase the participant’s perceptiveness?



Competitivity

How pitted against each other are participants? How much can they work together towards a common goal?



Abstraction

When simulating another activity, how abstractly is it being simulated? How well does the activity translate to others? E.g. if learning to play piano in VR, how well would a participant be able to play piano in real life?



Adherence to a reality

Closeness

How much does the activity adhere to a given reality?

Selection

Which reality is it adhering to? E.g. the Wild West/outer space/etc

Intensity

How intense is the adherence? 

Combinability

Does the activity draw from one or many realities? E.g. pure Wild West/postapocalyptic, Teletubbies-style Wild West

Theme/Topic

Which part of that reality is this activity? E.g. barber/polititian/farmer/God/insect/specific event/administration of a shop/molecule



Connectedness of steps

How interconnected are steps in the activity? E.g. taunting might be less interconnected to the overall goal of the activity. In contrast, most major events that happen in a movie generally are very connected to each other.



Personalization/Expression

Width

Which aspects can users express about themselves? E.g. body | mind | emotion | energy

Depth

How profoundly can the user express themselves? E.g. when expressing thoughts, they can express only a fixed amount of letters every certain amount of time, predefined messages or full, unrestricted thoughts



Avatar

How much is the participant controlling a representation of himself? E.g. fully if it is controlling its own body in a sport (with the varying degrees of success it might have) or partially if it is controlling a representation of itself like in a traditional video game or tabletop game. First person VR might be an in-between.



Planning

How much previous planning does each step require?



Speed of action

For a given objective in the activity, how fast is the participant required to make a given action?



Control

W5 (Who, what, where, when, why) and how can actions be controlled?

Who

What

Where

When

Why

How

Depth

Can the participant control every minute position of the parts of itself or are actions clumped together?



Learning curve

How steep or gentle is the learning curve?



Randomicity

How random are elements of the activity?



Importance of a dimension

To the participant

How important is each of these dimensions to the participant?

To an objective

How important is each of these dimensions to a given objective? E.g. if the objective is to tease others, focusing on playing at any given speed may not be so necessary 









Motivation



A taxonomy for activities: Dimensions in which to consider activities (or, how to finally categorize video games in useful genres)



Tl;dr: 

To make categorizing video games, or any activity, for that matter, finally effective, follow these steps:

Allow each game/activity to fall into more than 1 category

To determine which categories to use, look at how each game solves all possible problems you can think of, e.g. if you want to play with someone else or be alone, that is one category; if you want to feel relaxed or energized, that is another category.

Assign a value for each category to all games. Values may be all binary, all decimal numbers, or their type may increase in complexity as needed. Do not ignore any category.

Plus some observations regarding playing the game of life, fruit of my spiritual path.



Long version:

We should try to learn from the fields that have already had to classify things very carefully in order for them to work, like "taxonomy" as applied to biology, or "normalization", as applied to databases, or neurology, to understand how we recall information. Without being an expert in either of those fields, but having basic knowledge about them, I can provide these improvements: 

1. Imagine you are going to store something in boxes. Therefore, an object can only be in a single box. That's how physical reality works. This manner of classifying fits best if you want to classify by a single category, say, color. You get a single box for blue things, another for red things, another for yellow things. In this case, the CATEGORY on which you are classifying elements is on color, and the VALUE is the color itself. Applying it to videogames, you may choose the CATEGORY to be "Reliance on quick reflexes in order to succeed", and the VALUES may be high or low, so that you could say that X game gives "high" "reliance to having quick reflexes in order to succeed" in the same manner you say 'I have underwears of "white" "color"'. So, what people are classifying as "action" game can be understood to be a game that has high RTHQRIOTS. Need a better word. But you get the point. And a turn based game is a game that gives low RTHQRIOTS. Furthermore, notice how it would probably be best to let the value be a decimal number, say, from 0 to 10, as opposed to just two options, to allow for infinitely precise classification of that aspect of a game, at least relative to all others. Why do we need to classify like this? Because we want to find it faster when we are looking for it. Say we put everything together in the same box. Then we'd have to look at every single one of the elements in order to find the one we want. And, in the worst case, it would be in the last place. So, we want to put them in roughly similar capacity boxes so we can try to remember the VALUE of the object we are looking for in a given CATEGORY, look into that box, and in the worst case we'd only have to look at all the contents in that box. If you've used a single level of various folders to classify files, you are doing this.

2. Now, in reality, you want to classify by many categories. Why? Because to confront different situations in life you need a tool that has a specific characteristic (VALUE) in different CATEGORIES. Tonight you need a PLASTIC umbrella so it repels water, and you need a FANCY outfit to dazzle the invitees. So, what do you do? How do you accommodate this increase in complexity? Well, if you kept using boxes, you might put smaller boxes inside the ones you already had. But then, for every category, the number of boxes increases exponentially, because if you are being very strict, in each level you will apply a single CATEGORY. So, for RELIANCE ON REACTION you may have two boxes: HIGH and LOW. But then on each of them you have boxes for NUMBER OF PLAYERS: SINGLE or MULTI. Then, inside each of those 4 small boxes, you have 2 boxes for EMOTIONS: UPBEAT or RELAXING. So, it would be very hard to maintain so many boxes. And just navigating them would be cumbersome. Further, the order in which you selected the boxes may not be the same order that someone else thinks is best, which would make it hard for them to figure their way around. A better solution is to use the metaphor that tags lend themselves toward (Gmail uses this). You can freely tag your element with whichever tag/s you want, and when you are researching that tag, some system helps you find all of the elements with that tag. Now, you should be thorough when using tags. You should decide which are all the CATEGORIES you want to classify on, the VALUES that these CATEGORIES can have, and assign at least one VALUE of each CATEGORY to each and all elements (games) you want to classify. And to help a system figure out if you have not forgotten to assign a VALUE of a given CATEGORY to a given element, perhaps the tags can hold the information of the category they belong to. So that some program goes through each of them and analyzes them. So, some of the tags would be {"category":"reliance on reaction", "value":"low"},{"category":"reliance on reaction", "value":"high"},{"category":"number of players", "value":"single"},{"category":"reliance on reaction", "value":"multi"}. I also think the values for all categories should be a decimal number. At least as a starting point. We can add more complexity as needed. A value of 6.78964 may not tell you how many players can play a game, but at least it tells you it is more multiplayer than a game with a 0.0000 in the same CATEGORY. The benefit of this approach is that you would give a VALUE to all CATEGORIES, and just by flipping a single value, you can solve a problem you thought you could not with that game. For example: chess is not social enough? Make it giant!

That's it for now. I've written in more depth, and described several CATEGORIES and VALUES following this idea. I can share it if you'd like. Mainly, I'd invite you to stop thinking about classification in terms you have used before. Notice it is a lazy way of determining expectations. Don't depend too much on expectations. Try to see life anew and fresh at every moment. Why? Because if you pay enough attention to life, your creativity blossoms. Go on a spiritual path. I'm serious. It will teach you to see life as it is and to find profoundness where you couldn't have even imagined it was possible. When you see a 2D character jumping in platforms and shooting, don't immediately compare it to Megaman. When you do that, you destroy both your and the developer's creativity. Focus on the utility of that game in the capacity that it has to solve a specific problem. That is one category. Then try to find a different type of problem that that game can solve. That's another category. For example, you want to hone your reflexes. That is one category. You want to feel relaxed. That's another category. The difference can be subtle, but that's where the magic is. In other words, because a game requires precise reaction doesn't necessarily mean that it definitely has to put you in a stressed/upbeat state. It may relax you instead. Maybe you don't know how. But you should keep open to infinite possibilities in life. The problem with the current way of classifying video games is that we are trying to fit different CATEGORIES as the same one, and that's where the imprecise VALUES arise. Well, in reality we are just lazily comparing it to something we know from before.

I'll be even more blunt: almost all of the current terms used to refer to game "genres" are bad, mainly because 

1) they are not exclusive to each other. It is as if we were classifying all objects in the world by whether they are blue or square. First, there are more colors (VALUES) than blue; second, there are more CATEGORIES that are useful to us; third, something can be both blue and square. Similarly, a game can be an action car racing adventure. "Adventure" loosely refers to the fact that the length of the game is usually long and certain topics are touched upon in the text and ambiance. Or a game can be a  roleplaying platformer that is not relying on action/reflexes. You may just not know one yet. You may not be able to fathom how it may be fun. But that's where the magic relies. 

2) Also, in the use of the terms we use to classify games, we rarely recognize the hierarchy some terms have in relationship to others, like how "action" is used to refer to all titles with a heavy reliance of reaction times. Many CATEGORIES can be nested within that one.



More broadly, see how you don’t have to depend upon how an activity/game has been designed/presented in order to be however you want to be. Notice you can find your fun anywhere, and it is a deeper, more interesting, challenging and reliable source of fun and stability for your wellbeing. You can create your own game inside a game. You can simulate role playing as whoever you want. You can let this burst into the rest of your life to notice that situations where you thought you must feel sad or angry about, in reality you can handle them however you want. We have this incredible power as human beings. Games can be a stepping stone towards this, if only we develop and use them more consciously. But there are deeper tools that I’ve experienced.